README.adoc, before:

# Fieldctl CLI

This cli aims to help on operating a local environment. The intention is to wrap some complicated commands which are used to develop in local.

The first target is MacOS.

## Motivation

You, as a developer, usually need to create ephemeral environments quickly to develop, test and debug.

These actions can occur quite often. And, in some cases, you rather prefer a clean environment than an already used one.

Every time a new instance of the cluster is needed, you need to destroy de cluster and re-create it.

In a Linux OS with some flavours of k8s (kind, k3s, k0s), these actions can take a small period of time.

In a MacOS, you might need to create a VM, making the repetitive process a time consumer (a couple of minutes each time can kill you patience)

The solution can be to leverage several tools (lima VM, vcluster, metallb). But that is too much work.

This CLI helps on making easy to create a VM with a k8s cluster (k3s) and deploy vclusters.

https://www.vcluster.com/[Vcluster] is a technology which allows to have multiple isolated k8s clusters within one "main" one.

Creating and deleting those `vclusters` is a matter of seconds. This helps on speeding up the development lifecycle.

## Dependencies

The CLI requires you to have already installed:

- https://github.com/lima-vm/lima#getting-started[Lima VM]
- https://www.vcluster.com/docs/getting-started/setup#download-vcluster-cli[vcluster]
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-macos/[kubectl]

IMPORTANT: When installing `Lima` do not forget to install https://github.com/lima-vm/vde_vmnet#install[vde_vmnet] to enable the network

## How to use

Download it and run to discover the commands:

```bash
fieldctl --help
fieldctl vm --help
fieldctl cluster --help
```

A folder will hold all the related files and persisted folders which are used within the VM. The folder is located at `~/.field`

NOTE: Internally, the cluster deployed in the VM leverages some docker registry as mirrors. The data is persisted in your host at `~.field` folder. Once you destroy the VM, you can recreate it and re-use the already downloaded images. This speeds up the installation time for your applications


image::docs/architecture.png[]

### Examples

```bash
# Create the Lima VM where to deploy the cluster.
# Notice that it will re-use your existing config file
# k3s is used as main cluster. Metallb is used to expose services as LoadBalancer to your host machine
fieldctl vm create --memory 8 --cpus 4 --disk 50

# To make the main cluster accessible from the host
fieldctl vm connect
```

WARNING: If you have issues, go to <<Troubleshooting>>


```bash
# Create a virtual cluster (vcluster) with name: `demo-1`. 
fieldctl cluster create -n demo-1

kubectl get ns

kubectl create ns test

kubectl create deployment nginx --image=nginx -n test

kubectl expose deployment nginx --port=80 --target-port=80 --type=LoadBalancer -n test

export APP_IP=$(kubectl -n test get svc nginx -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].*}')

curl $APP_IP
# You should be able to access nginx

fieldctl cluster create -n demo-2

kubectl get ns
# You should NOT see the test namespace because this is another environment

# Delete the first cluster
fieldctl cluster delete -n demo-1
```

## DEV Notes

**Why python?** The CLI could have been developed using any other language. However, python is easy to read and develop even not having much experience.

As well, one of the packages is https://github.com/pyinstaller/pyinstaller[pyinstaller] which facilitates the creation of the binary.

**Why click?** click is a python framework to develop CLIs. It is extremely friendly an intuitive making the development of your CLI quite easy to anybody to understand it and to collaborate.

The downside is on execution time. In order to run, the binary creates a temporary folder in your filesystem to deploy the embedded resources like the template. This creates a small latency the first time is executed.

Notice that:

- Work in progress. The cli is open to grow in any direction. For example: Add commands to test scenarios
- No tests created. Being first iterations, there are no test to cover the results.
- Code is not polished. Being firsts iterations, the code is still dirty

## Troubleshooting

- When running `fieldctl vm create --memory 8 --cpus 4 --disk 50`, I get this error:
```text
networks.yaml field `path.vdeSwitch` error: lstat /opt/vde/bin/vde_switch: no such file or directory
```

Then, you need to install https://github.com/lima-vm/vde_vmnet#install[vde_vmnet]

- When installing https://github.com/lima-vm/vde_vmnet#install[vde_vmnet], the step: `sudo make PREFIX=/opt/vde install` fails

Then, you might be missing some packages required to build and install `vde_vmnet`

```bash
brew install autoconf automake libtool
```

- `vd_vmnet` is installed but Lima cannot find it

Then, run following commands to figure out the executable path to `vde_vmnet` and `vde_switch`
```bash
which vde_vmnet # i.e. /opt/vde/bin/vde_vmnet
which vde_switch # i.e. /opt/vde/bin/vde_switch
```

Include those paths into the `$PATH` environment variable:

```bash
# Having `/opt/vde/bin/vde_vmnet` in $HOME/.bashrc or $HOME/.zshrc add:
export PATH="/opt/vde/bin:$PATH"
```

Add `lima` to `sudoers`:

```bash
limactl sudoers | sudo tee /etc/sudoers.d/lima
/private/etc/sudoers.d/ # You should see `lima`
```

Verify that `Lima` links correctly to executables and sodoer:

```bash
cat ~/.lima/_config/networks.yaml
```

And you should see something similar to:
```yaml
paths:
  vdeSwitch: /opt/vde/bin/vde_switch
  vdeVMNet: /opt/vde/bin/vde_vmnet
  varRun: /private/var/run/lima
  sudoers: /private/etc/sudoers.d/lima
```

## Acknowledgements

Fieldctl is built upon other open source code projects. Without these projects Fieldctl would never have seen the light.

- https://github.com/lima-vm/lima[Lima VM]
- https://github.com/loft-sh/vcluster[Vcluster]
- https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s[k3s]
- https://github.com/metallb/metallb[MetalLB]

Commit message:

DX Improvements
- Add autocompletion
- Manage kube contexts when creating/destroying virtual clusters
- Make cli more developer friendly
- Add log traces and comments in code
- Add log-level to cli

README.adoc, after:

# Fieldctl CLI

This cli aims to help on operating a local environment. The intention is to wrap some complicated commands which are used to develop in local.

The first target is MacOS.

## Motivation

You, as a developer, usually need to create ephemeral environments quickly to develop, test and debug.

These actions can occur quite often. And, in some cases, you rather prefer a clean environment than an already used one.

Every time a new instance of the cluster is needed, you need to destroy de cluster and re-create it.

In a Linux OS with some flavours of k8s (kind, k3s, k0s), these actions can take a small period of time.

In a MacOS, you might need to create a VM, making the repetitive process a time consumer (a couple of minutes each time can kill your patience)

The solution can be to leverage several tools (lima VM, vcluster, metallb). But that is too much work.

This CLI helps on making easy to create a VM with a k8s cluster (k3s) and deploy vclusters.

https://www.vcluster.com/[Vcluster] is a technology which allows to have multiple isolated k8s clusters within one "main" one.

Creating and deleting those `vclusters` is a matter of seconds. This helps on speeding up the development lifecycle.

## Dependencies

The CLI requires you to have already installed:

- https://github.com/lima-vm/lima#getting-started[Lima VM]
- https://www.vcluster.com/docs/getting-started/setup#download-vcluster-cli[vcluster]
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-macos/[kubectl]

IMPORTANT: When installing `Lima` do not forget to install https://github.com/lima-vm/vde_vmnet#install[vde_vmnet] to enable the network

## How to use

Download it and run to discover the commands:

```bash
fieldctl --help
fieldctl vm --help
fieldctl virtual --help
```

A folder will hold all the related files and persisted folders which are used within the VM. The folder is located at `~/.field`

NOTE: Internally, the cluster deployed in the VM leverages some docker registry as mirrors. The data is persisted in your host at `~.field` folder. Once you destroy the VM, you can recreate it and re-use the already downloaded images. This speeds up the installation time for your applications


image::docs/architecture.png[]

### Autocomplete

Autocomplete scripts are in `autcomplete` folder. There is support for `bash`, `zsh` and `fish`

- Bash

Source `autocomplete/fieldctl-complete.bash` script in `~/.bashrc`.

- Zsh
Source `autocomplete/fieldctl-complete.zsh` script in `~/.zshrc`.

- Fish
Save the `autocomplete/fieldctl-complete.fish` script to `~/.config/fish/completions/foo-bar.fish`

### Examples

```bash
# Create the Lima VM where to deploy the cluster.
# Notice that it will re-use your existing config file
# k3s is used as main cluster. Metallb is used to expose services as LoadBalancer to your host machine
fieldctl vm create --memory 8 --cpus 4 --disk 50

# To make the main cluster accessible from the host
fieldctl vm connect
```

WARNING: If you have issues, go to <<Troubleshooting>>


```bash
# Create a virtual cluster (vcluster) with name: `demo-1`. 
fieldctl virtual create -n demo-1

kubectl get ns

kubectl create ns test

kubectl create deployment nginx --image=nginx -n test

kubectl expose deployment nginx --port=80 --target-port=80 --type=LoadBalancer -n test

export APP_IP=$(kubectl -n test get svc nginx -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].*}')

curl $APP_IP
# You should be able to access nginx

fieldctl virtual create -n demo-2

kubectl get ns
# You should NOT see the test namespace because this is another environment

# Delete the first cluster
fieldctl virtual delete -n demo-1
```

## DEV Notes

**Why python?** The CLI could have been developed using any other language. However, python is easy to read and develop even not having much experience.

As well, one of the packages is https://github.com/pyinstaller/pyinstaller[pyinstaller] which facilitates the creation of the binary.

**Why click?** click is a python framework to develop CLIs. It is extremely friendly an intuitive making the development of your CLI quite easy to anybody to understand it and to collaborate.

The downside is on execution time. In order to run, the binary creates a temporary folder in your filesystem to deploy the embedded resources like the template. This creates a small latency the first time is executed.

Notice that:

- Work in progress. The cli is open to grow in any direction. For example: Add commands to test scenarios
- No tests created. Being first iterations, there are no test to cover the results.
- Code is not polished. Being firsts iterations, the code is still dirty

## Troubleshooting

- When running `fieldctl vm create --memory 8 --cpus 4 --disk 50`, I get this error:
```text
networks.yaml field `path.vdeSwitch` error: lstat /opt/vde/bin/vde_switch: no such file or directory
```

Then, you need to install https://github.com/lima-vm/vde_vmnet#install[vde_vmnet]

- When installing https://github.com/lima-vm/vde_vmnet#install[vde_vmnet], the step: `sudo make PREFIX=/opt/vde install` fails

Then, you might be missing some packages required to build and install `vde_vmnet`

```bash
brew install autoconf automake libtool
```

- `vd_vmnet` is installed but Lima cannot find it

Then, run following commands to figure out the executable path to `vde_vmnet` and `vde_switch`
```bash
which vde_vmnet # i.e. /opt/vde/bin/vde_vmnet
which vde_switch # i.e. /opt/vde/bin/vde_switch
```

Include those paths into the `$PATH` environment variable:

```bash
# Having `/opt/vde/bin/vde_vmnet` in $HOME/.bashrc or $HOME/.zshrc add:
export PATH="/opt/vde/bin:$PATH"
```

Add `lima` to `sudoers`:

```bash
limactl sudoers | sudo tee /etc/sudoers.d/lima
/private/etc/sudoers.d/ # You should see `lima`
```

Verify that `Lima` links correctly to executables and sodoer:

```bash
cat ~/.lima/_config/networks.yaml
```

And you should see something similar to:
```yaml
paths:
  vdeSwitch: /opt/vde/bin/vde_switch
  vdeVMNet: /opt/vde/bin/vde_vmnet
  varRun: /private/var/run/lima
  sudoers: /private/etc/sudoers.d/lima
```

## Acknowledgements

Fieldctl is built upon other open source code projects. Without these projects Fieldctl would never have seen the light.

- https://github.com/lima-vm/lima[Lima VM]
- https://github.com/loft-sh/vcluster[Vcluster]
- https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s[k3s]
- https://github.com/metallb/metallb[MetalLB]
